Welcome back.
Let's talk about our fifth sorting algorithm quicksort even just from the name you're thinking huh.
This is going to be quick.
Quick sort just like merge sort is a divide and conquer algorithm.
Which means and should ring a bell in your head saying that there's probably going to be all of and
log in and if you're thinking that you're right.
You see quicksort uses something called a pivoting technique to break the main list into smaller lists
and these smaller lists use the pivoting technique until they are sorted.
But let me show you an animation of quicksort.
Quicksort works like this.
And if you're looking at this diagram like I am and you're completely confused as to what is happening
this describes quicksort fairly well.
It's pretty complex to understand.
So let me show you a better demonstration.
I have a little diagram here.
Let's say we have a list that looks like this.
We have 3 7 8 9 5 2 1 9 5 4 what we do here is we pick a random pivot.
Let's say that 4 is going to be our pivot.
Once we pick this pivot item we're going to say all right I want all numbers that are less than 4 to
come to its left and all numbers that are greater than 4 to come to its right.
So what do we do.
Well we start comparing the numbers we look at three and four.
All right.
Three is to the left of four that's fine.
What about 7 m for.
Seven is higher than four so it should be to it's right.
We're going to move four to the left position to make space for seven seven jumps over to the right
and we swap the five that four came into into the seven position.
And now we check five and four.
We've got to do the same thing.
We put five to the right of four and so up nine in there once again nine is higher than four.
So 9 comes to the right of 4.
Then we look at eight.
Same thing with hate.
And then finally five and four.
Well four and five switch places.
And now we have a list that has four as the pivot.
And we know that four is going to be in that position in the array and everything else to the left of
it and to the right of it still needs to get sorted.
But at least we know where four stands from there using divide and conquer.
We now split the list and we do the same thing.
We get a pivot on the left list which will be 2 and we say everything to the right of 2 should be higher.
Everything to the left of two should be lower.
And we have this left list sorted on the right we do the same thing until we split the list with 7 in
the middle and we keep breaking things down keep breaking things down like a tree.
And this is where we divide and conquer comes from.
Until we have all the individual lists sorted and we combine them.
Now you might have two questions for me looking at this.
One is how do we even pick this pivot point.
And that is kind of random.
It really really depends on the situation.
But as you see here we just happen to pick the pivot point as always the last item in the array.
The second is how am I ever going to code this.
And this is pretty challenging and I don't expect you to get it.
I'll leave code for you and you can try it out if you want but the best way to understand quicksort
is my favorite Hungarian dance ever.
I'm not going to play this for you.
You can play it on your own but I swear I could watch this all day.
I think that dancing is awesome.
The music is awesome.
And well if you speed it up to two times it's even better.
Here in this video let me mute this.
You'll see that this person in the Black Hat is going to be the pivot and everybody is comparing the
person in the Red Hat is the pointer I guess or the item that's being compared to the pivot and you'll
see here that as soon as we get to to this person is number three they're going to say well you should
be to the left to me.
So they're going to dance.
By the way great dancing moves.
I need to learn these steps.
And two and three are now in different locations.
And now we compare 0 and three.
Now this implementation and the visual that I just showed you is a little bit different.
But the idea is the same quicksort can be implemented in different ways.
But the idea of a pivot is the same.
I encourage you to watch this video to fully understand how it works underneath the hood but let's go
over the main concepts.
Quicksort is really really useful and between quicksort and Merceron I would say those are the most
used sorting algorithms.
You'll notice your two things.
One is that quick sorts space complexity plays really really good.
I mean not as good as bubble sort or insertion sort or a selection sort but it's still better than Murchu
at its worst case is 0 of and square that is because it can be over when squared when the pivot is the
smallest or the largest item in the list because then you're not really splitting the list in half.
And because of this you really want to make sure that you pick a good pivot for quicksort.
You'll get the better space complexity but the worst case could be bad.
So in those cases merge sort might be better if your list was presorted for whatever reason.
And in that list if we pick the pivot to be the first item or the last item then our sorting routine
would take a very very long time because again the list will not really be split in half and ideally
in a quick sort you're picking the pivot intelligently based on your list.
Now quicksort there is a lot of variance to it and there's different implementations.
But I want you to take this away from this video.
Quicksort is usually the fastest on average but the one downside is that it has some pretty nasty worst
case behaviors.
So if you have to guarantee no bad data or you can guarantee that the pivot is going to be good then
you should be avoiding quicksort.
But on average it's usually the best sorting algorithm.
All right.
So we've learned five different sorting algorithms but the most important part is when should I use
what in the next video we're going to go over exactly that followed by a fun little exercise.
I'll see in that one.